
# Capstone : Job Classification( Data Scientist )

### Anshu Dhingra


## Problem Statement

 -Job classification is the process to determine the relative rank of different jobs in an organization. This is important since the   hierarchical position a job is classified as underlies many HR decisions. A good job classification leads to fair, equitable,senior jobs have higher requirements in terms of performance and capabilities, and enables succession planning to more senior roles.Classification involves taking the characteristics of a job and categorizing it based on the classifications, input which we will take is the job description.

  Data science has been called “the sexiest job of the 21st century” — more business leaders in all industry are hiring data scientists into environments where we can be effective. 
Data Science team has been asked to classify the Data Scientist job based on the senority. The job description of 10,000 Data Scientist role has been provided to understand what could be the key terms should be mentioned on Data Scientist position. What all are the overlaps and differences in the Job description. Topic modelling has also been performed to understand the key topics in the job description. 
 
 ##  Executive Summary

- Data Science is a new field and there is an influx of talent in this field generated by range of training and courses offered by both academic and professional institutions. Data Science needs of the organizations, and hence the talent and experience requirements, also vary at different level of jobs.

The Data Science Skills Matrix A Data Scientist is expected to have knowledge in three areas: Statistics, Engineering, and Business. However, you’re not expected to master all three areas right from the get-go. Which skills should you focus on when seeking an entry-level position? Which skills become more important as you progress through the career ladder?

Junior Data Scientists don’t have experience in engineering complex product solutions.Hence, they are not expected to come up with new products to impact the Fundamental Business Equation.
Mid -Senior Data Scientists should be able to frame Data Science problems. Good candidates have great insights from past Data Science experiences.They are focussing more of product development
Manager/Director Data Scientist should be able to understand the product life cycle and focus more on managing client expectations.


## Files 
- `'Job_Classification_Data_Cleaning_Pre_Processing'`
- `'Job Classification_Text_cleaning_EDA'`
- `'Classification_Modeling-Conclusion'`

## Data Dictionary

[**Data set was taken from Dataworld website**](https://data.world/jobspikr/10000-data-scientist-job-postings-from-the-usa).

|Feature|Variable type||Description|

|:----|:---|:---|:---|
|0   |crawl_timestamp |      10000 non-null|  object |
| 1  | url             |      10000 non-null|  object |
| 2  | job_title       |      10000 non-null|  object |
|3 |category          |    9118 non-null  | object |
|4  | company_name      |    9999 non-null  | object |
|5   |city              |    9751 non-null  | object |
| 6  | state            |     9584 non-null |  object| 
| 7  | country          |     10000 non-null | object| 
| 8   |inferred_city    |     8980 non-null  | object |
| 9   |inferred_state   |     9484 non-null |  object |
| 10  |inferred_country |     9505 non-null |  object |
| 11  |post_date        |     10000 non-null | object |
| 12  |job_description |      10000 non-null | object |
|13  |job_type         |     10000 non-null | object |
|14  |salary_offered   |     597 non-null   | object |
| 15 | job_board       |      9310 non-null |  object| 
| 16 | geo             |      9300 non-null |  object| 
| 17  |cursor          |      10000 non-null|  int64  |
| 18  |contact_email  |       0 non-null     | float64|
| 19  |contact_phone_number | 416 non-null   | object |
| 20  |uniq_id             |  10000 non-null | object |
| 21  |html_job_description | 1599 non-null  | object |


|**Model| Train accuracy| Test accuracy|Accuracy|presion|recall**|
|:---|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:----:|
|Logistic and balanced |0.99|0.82|0.82|0.79|0.74|
|Naive Bayes with CountVectorizer |0.74|0.69|0.55|0.59|0.56|
|Random Forest with balance|0.95|0.82|0.82|0.82|0.69|


## Conclusion and Recommendation:¶

The goal here is to classify the Data Scientist Job position based on Seniority of Job title.

In this problem we are dealing with an unbalanced class classification problem where the baseline score is 60% due to unbalanced data. In case of unbalanced date, there is a need to upscale the minority class to get the right prediction. We have used  weighted scale techniques to deal with the unbalanced data.

### From EDA:
Average number of years of experince is 4+ years
Masters and Phd degree are recommended as they are coming more than 50% and 30%
California, Virgina and Washington are some of the states where there is high demands of Data scientist
Companies like TEKSystems, Facebook, SSRS have highest number of positions.
Python,R, SQL,Algorithm, Data Visualtization,Hadoop, Jave are top skills required for Data Scientist.

- Multiclass model on Seniority of position(Word Cloud)

   - ASSOCIATE/JUNIOR DATA SCIENTIST needs to focus on project and statistical modeling and techonology
   - DATA SCIENTIST focus more on problem statement, statistical models and product development helping business   serve its customer better.
   - SENIOR DATA SCIENTIST are more focus on product development and statistical model to come up with business solution.
   - MANAGER DS are focusing more on client management and product development.

### |Inference|:

The dataset availble has limitation of defining right class. The top feature predictors are very similar. Experience, managing, year experience are some of the top predictors of the positive class. Random forest with balanced weight class performed well with 0.82 accuracy and less overfitted compare to Logistic regression.

### |Recommendation|:

Try to run neural network model LSTM.
Some more feature engineering to take affect of industry for better prediction.
look for more dataset or try scrapping the job description
(Got inspiration from below links) 

('https://www.kaggle.com/ryanvu/data-science-job-market-eda-and-text-analysis'),

'https://neptune.ai/blog/exploratory-data-analysis-natural-language-processing-tools',

'https://www.datascienceweekly.org/articles/the-difference-between-junior-mid-level-and-senior-data-scientist-jobs'
